Here is the rewritten chapter:

CHAPTER II: THE REVOLT OF THE OLD MEN

Two women drove the canoe onto the beach, its outrigger tilting precariously. Dick, followed by Katafa, approached, his hand resting on the mast stays attached to the outrigger grating. He turned to the women, who stood, paddles in hand, looking from him to Katafa.

"And the builders?" he asked, "where are they?"

The shorter woman clucked her tongue and turned away, gazing out at the lagoon. The taller one looked Dick straight in the face.

"They will not come," she said. "They say Uta Matu alone was their king and he is dead, also they say they are too old. 'A mataya ayana'—they are feeble and near past the fishing, even in the quiet water."

The shorter woman choked back a laugh, then turned to Dick.

"They will not come, Taori, all else is talk."

Dick's eyes blazed with anger, but it quickly gave way to thought. This was no ordinary defiance. The only men who could direct the building of the big war canoes refused to work, and from the tone and looks of the women, Dick saw that if something were not done to bring the canoe-builders to heel, his power to make the natives do things would be gone.

Dick never wasted much time in thought. He turned from the canoe, raced up to the house, and came racing back with a fish spear. Then, calling to the women, he helped to run the canoe out, sprang on board, and helped to raise the mat sail to the wind.

"I will soon return," he cried to Katafa, his voice carried across the sparkling water on a slant of the wind. The women crouched down to ballast the canoe, and with the steering paddle in his hand, Dick steered.

As he navigated the canoe, Dick took in every detail – the rattans of the grating, the way the mast stays were fixed to the grating, and how the mast itself was stepped. Though he had never steered a canoe before, the sea-craft inborn in him carried him through, and the women watching saw nothing indicative of indecision.

The beach where the remnants of the southern tribe lived was exactly opposite to the beach of the northern tribe, and as both beaches were close to the break in the reef, the distance from one to the other was little over a mile. As they drew close, Dick could see more distinctly the few remaining huts under the shelter of a grove of Jack-fruit trees; beyond the Jack-fruit stood pandanus palms bending lagoonward, and three tall coconut palms sharp against the white up-flaring horizon.

As the canoe beached, Dick saw the rebels. They were seated on the sand close to the most easterly of the huts, seated in the shadow of the Jack-fruit leaves; three old men seated, two with their knees up and one tailor-fashion, whilst close to them by the edge of a little pool lay a girl.

As Dick drew near, followed by the taller of the boat women, the girl, who had been gazing into the waters of the pool, looked up. She was Le Moan, granddaughter of Le Juan, the witch woman of Karolin now dead and gone to meet judgment for the destruction she had caused. Le Moan was only fourteen, with a dark beauty just beginning to unfold from the bud, and she was strange as the sea depths themselves.

Dick stood before Aioma, the chief of the three old men, and his eyes fixed on the old man's face.

"You are Aioma?" said Dick, who had singled the chief out by instinct.

The three old men rose to their feet. The sight of the newcomer helped, but it was the singling out of Aioma with such success by one who had never seen him that produced the effect. Surely here was a chief.

"I am Aioma," replied the other. "What want you with me?"

"That which the woman had already told you," replied Dick, who hated waste of words or repeating himself.

"They told me of the new chief who had come to the northern beach—e uma kaio tau—and of how he had ordered canoes to be built," said Aioma, "and I said, 'I am too old, and Uta is dead, and I know no chief but Uta; also in the last war on that Island in the north all the men of Karolin fell and they have never returned, they nor their canoes.' So what is the use of building more canoes when there are no men to fill them?"

"The men are growing," said Dick.

"Ay, they are growing," grumbled Aioma, "but it will be many moons before they are ready to take the paddle and the spear—and even so, where is the enemy? The sea is clear."

"Aioma," said Dick, "I have come from there," pointing to the north; "the sea is not clear."

Neither of Aioma's companions said a word whilst Aioma stood looking at the ground as if consulting it, then his eyes rose to Dick's face. Age and war had made Aioma wise, he knew men and he knew Truth when he saw her.

"I will do your bidding, Taori," said he quite simply, then he turned to the others, spoke some words to them, giving directions what to do till his return, and led the way to the canoe.

Le Moan, still crouching by the well, said nothing. Her eyes were fixed on Dick, this creature so new, so different from any one she had ever seen. Perhaps the race spirit was telling her that here was a being of her father's race miraculously come to Karolin, perhaps she was held simply by the grace and youth of the newcomer—who knows?